["I"]:
We've been working hard
on a new machine...
One that can fly in the sky.
We're going to use it to
leave this world far behind.
The world we're going to
is full of life...
full of warmth and fun.
But we have to hurry.
Time is short.
Winter is approaching fast,
and when the cold sets in,
she won't be able to work
on things like this.
That's why we can't rest...
why we can't stop
until the very end.
[Tomoya]:
Did you have your parent-teacher
conference yet?
[Nagisa]:
Yes, but we didn't
talk about much.
I can't find anything I
want to study in college...
so I think I'm going to start
looking for a job soon.
Your grades are pretty good,
it seems like a waste.
By the way, what
are you planning to do
after you
graduate, Tomoya?
Umm... Anyway, you, uh,
want me to buy you something?
Like a present
or whatever?
I'm confused. Does this have
anything to do with graduating?
Oh, no, not really, I just
felt like giving you a present
all of a sudden,
that's all.
Tomoya, you're trying to
avoid my question, aren't you?
And besides, you can't just
give someone a present,
you have to have
a reason for it.
I want to buy a little something
for the person I'm in love with.
That should be a good
enough reason for anyone.
I guess; but if that was
the only reason you needed
to buy someone a present,
then I'd have to
buy you one every day.
[Tomoya]:
That doesn't make any sense.
By your logic, the only times I
could give you a present
are on your birthday
and Christmas.
No. In my case you would only
buy me a present once a year.
Why's that?
Because my birthday
is on December 24th
and I don't want
to be greedy.
What rotten luck; why'd you have
to born at a time like that?
I don't know. Why don't you ask
my parents? It's their fault.
Fine!
[Tomoya]:
Then how 'bout we go
on a date instead?
Huh? That seems
kind of sudden...
If I can't give you a present,
then we'll go on a date!
Sounds good, right?
Sure! That sounds
wonderful!
Good deal.
See you later.
Yeah! See you
after class!
Hey, wait! You never
answered my question.
You're mean, Tomoya.
Graduation...
[Sunohara]:
Good morning, Okazaki!
All that and
a toilet!
Back on your
toilet kick, I see.
You're looking awfully glum
this morning, amigo.
Is your honeymoon period with
Nagisa over already?
Hey, listen. Do you
know what you're gonna do
after you graduate?
'Course I do! I wouldn't want to
trouble my dear little sister,
so after some
serious consideration,
I've come to
the perfect solution!
Really?
Yep! I'm gonna make
money off of my looks!
[Sunohara]:
I'm gonna be a model.
Get it? A model.
Oh, obviously...
I know, right?
It's like, "Man! why didn't
I think of it sooner?"
If I hit it off big,
I might even be able to break
into the entertainment world.
DUDE!
This is serious!
I might be famous!
The kids'll hang
on my every word!
I'll use my power to make
the Sunohara Brigade!
It must be nice to be
so young and carefree.
Yeah! My future is
so bright, it's blinding!
[Ryou]:
The cards don't lie!
You really can be a model!
Really?! All right!
You'll hit it off big and break
into the entertainment world,
kids will hang on
your every word,
then you'll form
the Sunohara Brigade.
Good! Okazaki, I'll let you be
second in command of my brigade!
Hurry; I might die
of anticipation.
Mm-hmm!
Now that I think about it,
everyone here is a senior,
except for me.
Have all of you decided
what you're going to do
after you graduate?
I was planning on going
to nursing school
as soon as possible.
I've wanted to do that
ever since I was little.
I always wanted to be a
preschool teacher, myself.
So I'll work on getting
my teacher's license.
As for me...
After I graduate, I'll be moving
to America to go to college.
[Kotomi]:
I'll probably be
lonely at first...
and I know I'll miss
all of you a whole bunch,
but I'll try to work
really hard and come back
to visit everyone
as soon as I can.
What a shame; that means
we won't be able
to hear your high-impact
violin solos anymore.
If you'd like, I could
play one right now...
No! Stop! For the love of God,
think before you speak!
I know you meant well Tomoyo,
but putting all of our lives
at stake isn't
very considerate.
I'm sorry. I'll try
to do better next time.
That's rude; she seemed
perfectly considerate to me.
So, uh, Okazaki,
what are you gonna do?
I hear you haven't
decided if you want
to go to college
or not...
so you're avoiding the guidance
counselors like the plague.
[Kyou]:
Come on, Nagisa, you gotta
give Tomoya a little shove
if you expect him
to do anything.
Nagisa?
Nagisa, what's wrong?
Don't worry about me.
I just... feel a little-
Nagisa!
[all gasp]
She's got a fever...
You sure you shouldn't be
staying with Nagisa right now?
It's not my choice;
there's a doctor at her house.
It might be awkward talking
about some stuff with me around.
[door knocking]
Yes?
Sunohara? You've got a
call from your sister.
Okay...
Want me to
tell her anything?
Just that she's welcome to
come visit whenever she likes.
Oh but don't tell her that
Nagisa collapsed, okay?
Okay.
What do you mean she collapsed?
Don't tell me Furukawa's sick.
Kinda. I uh guess you could say
she's got a weak constitution.
Last time she got sick, she
missed too many days of school
and ended up getting
held back a year.
Oh, I see.
Try to show her
all the support you can.
[Tomoya]:
Nagisa... ?
Yes?
Oh, you don't need to get
up; I was just saying hi.
Oh, okay. I'll
lie back down.
I'll be back later.
'Kay. Hope you have
a good day at school.
Try to get some rest, now...
All right.
[Sunohara]:
You think you might
be worrying too much?
I mean, this has happened a
lot of times before, right?
The last time Nagisa
ended up missing class,
you were spaced
out for weeks.
So I'm just saying you shouldn't
get stressed out over nothing.
Did you come to see
Kyou again, little buddy?
[Kyou]:
TOMOYA!
Oh, you were just saying hi? I
thought you were gonna eat her.
You could've asked me
instead of getting violent!
What should we do?
Can you go home
by yourself?
I don't speak pig,
but it looks like she
wants to stay with you guys.
Hmm... She can't.
I need to go to PE
in a few minutes.
Why don't YOU
take care of her?
[Tomoya]:
Huh? Why me?
N-no, it'll be okay.
I'm her owner, too,
so I should take
responsibility and...
I don't get it; what,
is she afraid of you?
One time I tried to give her
a bath and made the water
a little
bit too hot.
She got the wrong idea and
thought I cooking her in a stew.
So she's hated
me ever since.
And so, there you have it.
She's all yours!
Hey! Don't tell me I have
to take this thing to class!
No way!
Botan, plushie mode!
This is but one of
Botan's seven tricks!
When she's like this,
people will think
you're a plushie enthusiast,
rather than someone
smuggling a boar into class.
Have you lost it?
What are you doing?
You owe me big time
for this!
I'll buy you some strawberry
milk tomorrow, okay?
That's the best
you can do?
I really am sorry.
By the way, if it's
not a bad time,
we were thinking about paying
Furukawa a little visit
right now.
Oh, sorry.
Actually, she said that she was
going to the hospital today.
I see... Tell Nagisa
we said hello, then.
Sure.
Well, see you
later, then.
Poor guy. I wonder if that took
his mind off of things a bit.
I feel so bad. Tomoya looked
really depressed, didn't he?
He acts tough, but he's got
a soft side, too. Trust me.
Poor Tomoya.
[Ryou]:
I hope Nagisa gets well soon...
[Tomoya]:
A month passed.
But Nagisa's condition
didn't improve.
One day... when she
was feeling a bit better...
she forced herself
to go to school.
But she only got half way there
before her fever returned.
[Nagisa]:
How did the test go?
Not too bad.
I don't skip classes
all the time like I used to.
[Nagisa]:
You're on break from
exams now, right?
Don't mind me; go enjoy yourself
while you have some time off.
I'd rather stay here,
if you don't mind.
You'll get bored staying
here doing nothing all day.
It'll be fine. I don't mind
waiting for now.
As long as I have something
to look forward to...
I don't understand.
What are you waiting for?
The day when I can walk with you
and hold your hand again.
I know we see each other all
the time at home and school...
but there aren't many
times when it's just
the two of
us together.
So I thought...
it might be nice to go on
a date where we could be alone
and just
hold hands.
We're alone
right now, aren't we?
I guess
you're right.
Then would you mind
holding my hand now?
[Tomoya]:
November came.
Seniors were busy studying for
upcoming college entrance exams.
I still went to school,
but my head was filled
with thoughts of Nagisa.
Here. I found the videos of some
old plays, just like you asked.
I tried to pick out
some that looked fun.
I hope they cheer you up a bit;
I hate to see you like this.
I appreciate it. Hope they
weren't a pain to dig up.
I think I owe you a few favors,
this is the least I could do.
It means a lot.
Say, Okazaki... you haven't lost
some weight recently, have you?
Just your imagination.
[Actor]:
As thanks for
your kindness,
I shall invite you
to the Cat Kingdom.
[Actress]:
Wow! Thank you.
[Tomoya]:
This is how we spent our autumn.
It was a bittersweet
sort of feeling.
Bit by bit,
the air became colder,
and before we knew it,
winter had crept up on us.
[Akio]:
I think it's about time
we had a little talk.
I hate to say this... but
with the way things are going,
I'm afraid Nagisa might have
to repeat her senior year.
[Sanae]:
She can't take her tests,
and it doesn't look like she'll
attend enough days to graduate.
All of her teachers say
she should just drop out,
and focus on getting medical
treatment, rather than
getting stressed out
about graduation.
And of course, we're more
concerned about her health
than her
academic record...
Yeah, but Nagisa-
Don't misunderstand;
I want Nagisa to decide
everything on her own.
But because it's
her decision,
if she isn't able to
graduate this semester,
then I want you
to accept that.
Please... can you
do that for me, Okazaki?
[Tomoya]:
It's no good.
I want to graduate with her.
I don't want to leave
her behind like that.
Okazaki, please...
I'm sorry, but if Nagisa isn't
going to graduate this year,
then I don't want
to graduate, either.
[Akio]:
You're so immature.
Who're you trying
to impress?
If you do that, it'll be
even harder on Nagisa.
[Akio]:
You realize that, don't you?
[Tomoya]:
He was absolutely right. I'm
immature. I'm still immature.
I was able to help my friends
when they needed me...
and in the last year, I felt
like I'd become a better person.
At least a little...
But now that the girl I love
might not graduate,
I feel like I don't know
anything anymore.
Maybe if I was more mature I
would've known what to do...
or I could've
accepted it, at least.
When December came around,
everyone was busy.
Everyone but me, at least.
Entrance exams, college
applications, job hunting...
I felt like I was
just left behind.
Happy birthday, Nagisa!
I hope you have
many more to come.
Happy Birthday
and Merry Christmas!
Sure are cheery, despite
getting turned down cold.
[Kyou]:
In case you didn't hear, he
actually sent an application
to a modeling agency.
I can do whatever I want!
I'm moving back home next year,
so I'll just end up getting a
job there, either way!
Nagisa.
Here, I got you a
birthday/christmas present.
Really?
It's a dango!
Hm?
Thank you so
much, Tomoya.
Thank you, guys for
coming here to visit me.
I know I'm not
worth much, but...
[Akio]:
Don't talk about
yourself like that, Nagisa.
We love you;
you're just as important as
anyone else in this family.
That's right.
And not only that,
you're a wonderful friend
to all of us, too.
I know you think of yourself
as a burden sometimes,
but as long as you're happy,
we're happy, too.
So please be happy,
Nagisa. For us.
I'm sorry, you guys.
Okay! I'll try my best!
Hee hee...
[Tomoya]:
It was Christmas Eve...
Nagisa's birthday.
It was also the day
when Nagisa decided
that she was going to repeat
her last year of school.
After the New Year,
fewer seniors
bothered coming to class.
I spent my time with Nagisa.
Even though she was small and
even though she was frail,
she always tried her best.
And I wanted to try
MY best to protect her
for the rest of my life.
[Tomoya]:
Sunohara, what do you say we go
around and break a few windows?
[Sunohara]:
You're kidding, right?
[Tomoya]:
I thought maybe if I did that,
I could repeat a year.
[Sunohara]:
You wouldn't repeat a year,
you'd be kicked out of school.
You're right.
Not much point
in that, huh?
[Koumura]:
Ah, Okazaki, Sunohara.
Congratulations on graduating.
[Sunohara]:
Thank you.
I'm going to be retiring
this year, myself.
Although it took me
a bit longer,
you might say I'm
graduating along with you.
Really, huh?
I hate to say it,
but without you around,
I'm a bit worried about how
things are gonna work out
for the drama club.
If you're worried about
Nagisa, you shouldn't be.
That girl's a lot stronger
and a lot more reliable
than you
two rascals.
By the way, I expect
a lot from you.
Takes a special kind of
student to give me grief
for four whole years;
so if nothing else,
I know you've got
a lot of spunk.
Thanks for sticking up
for us all these years.
We probably woulda been
expelled a long time ago
if it wasn't for you!
You know... there's something
I've been meaning to ask you.
When me and Sunohara met each
other in the office that day...
did you plan that, or was
it just a coincidence?
Huh? What's that
supposed to mean?
The two of us get
along really well, right?
We were both troublemakers,
but if we had a good friend
at school, then maybe we
wouldn't want to drop out.
Is that why you wanted us
to meet each other?
That's a good question.
I don't remember.
Your memory starts to slip
when you're my age.
At any rate, you're members
of society, starting tomorrow.
Be sure to show up for
your last homeroom class,
so you can give a proper
goodbye to your school days.
Thank you very much, sir.
I Really appreciate
all you've done for me.
I didn't do anything;
I should be thanking you.
Speaking of which,
they decided to preserve
the cherry trees after all. I
really owe you one for that.
When the new
semester starts,
Nagisa will be in
the same grade as you.
Look after her
for me, okay?
Give me a break.
Of course I will!
I hope everything works
out for you, Okazaki.
[Kyou]:
Tomoya!
We're all going to
a party right now.
But I guess you have
someplace else to go, huh?
'Fraid so.
Anpan!
Ah!
This outrageous lie
just came out...
Dummy! You need to
stay inside and rest!
Sorry, I couldn't resist.
No matter what...
I had to see the last time
you wore your uniform.
Congratulations.
I'm proud of you.
I'm glad you were
able to graduate.
Nagisa...
Hm?
[Tomoya]:
I... really did
it, didn't I?
Yeah...
It's all over. I'll never
be a student there again.
To be honest, I really hated
that place... but, in the end...
because I was with you,
I wanted to stay there forever.
It sucks. There were so many
times I was so miserable
that I wanted to quit...
but you know...
the last year I spent with you,
I finally enjoyed myself.
I was finally happy!
I don't want to graduate now!
I just want to stay with you!
[Nagisa]:
Tomoya...
You can't hold yourself back
over something silly like that.
If you have the chance to move
on, then you should take it.
I want you to
move on... okay?
In the meantime, I'll try
my best for another year!
And one more thing...
would you mind holding
my hand for a while?
Idiot... what if it
makes your fever go up?
C'mon, a little
bit won't hurt.
It doesn't have
to be far,
I just want to hold
hands and walk.
[Tomoya]:
I wanted to keep walking
and never stop.
Forever, wherever...
Along the never-ending path...
...together with you.
[Sanae]:
Oh? What are your
plans right now?
[Tomoya]:
Uh, nothing in particular.
[Akio]:
How 'bout you work here
at the bakery for a while?
[Tomoya]:
Huh?
[Sanae]:
Well, I'm glad; I look forward
to working with you, Tomoya.
[Tomoya]:
Wait, say again?
[Sanae]:
You don't mind me using
your first name, do you?
We're practically family now...
it only seems natural.